---
title: Fishbowl
category: discussing
story: |
  It was time for a company retreat, and we had gathered 200 people from around the world into a giant conference room.  

  Martin got up and said, "We're going to have a group discussion about company issues"

  "How can 200 people have a discussion...?" I wondered.

  The rules were simple, there would be a "Fishbowl" in the middle of the room with 6 chairs around a table.  Only people sitting at this fishbowl would be allowed to talk, and there must always be a free chair so that anyone else might join the conversation.

  Over the next 2 hours we had a very intense and interesting dialogue about hard issues.  The CEO even sat down a couple times to argue issues with the other people in the fishbowl, but he never stayed for long.  

problem: |
  As a group gets larger, it becomes increasingly impossible to have an intimate or even coherent conversation in which anyone can speak.

answer: |
  Create a fishbowl. Only people sitting in the "fishbowl" can talk. Everyone else gets to listen, but it's easy to step into the fishbowl because there's always a free chair.  Fishbowls can allow huge groups (100+) to have meaningful discussions.

credit: |
  I was introduced to the fishbowl by "Martin Fowler":http://martinfowler.com/.
  And then saw a different version done at PSL w/ Jerry Weinberg, et al
---

h3. Variations

h4. Everyone sits around a table and talks

h4. Use a [Talking Stick]

Everyone sits in a circle and uses a talking stick (within the fishbowl) when they want to talk.

A microphone makes a very natural talking stick :).

h4. Toss in "Fish Food"

The people outside the fishbowl can toss in questions for people inside the fishbowl to answer

h4. Sit in a semi circle

This opens up the fishbowl to a large "audience". This makes it more like a panel discussion, but also removes some of the intimacy of sitting in a circle.

You can also pass a mic back and forth using this format pretty easily.